Dear Dr. McSweeney,

I am writing regarding manuscript PAS-20016 entitled "MWA tied-array processing III: Microsecond time resolution via a polyphase synthesis filter", which you submitted to PASA. I have now received a report on this paper from an anonymous expert referee, as appended at the bottom of this letter.

You will see that the referee is very positive about the topic you are tackling, and your general approach. However, they have major concerns about your choice of filter. I agree with this assessment, and recommend that your paper undergo major revisions before it can be considered for publication. I thus invite you to respond to the comments below and to revise your manuscript. [The reviewer's positive view of your overall approach has led to this, rather than a "Reject+resubmit", recommendation - but please ensure that you properly address the major concern relating to your filter choice.]

To make your revisions, log in to https://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/astro and enter your Author Centre, where you will find this manuscript listed under 'Manuscripts with Decisions'.  Under 'Actions', click on 'Create a Revision'.  Your manuscript number has been appended to denote a revision.

You can also click the link below to start the revision process (or continue the process if you have already started your revision) for your manuscript. If you use the link below you will not be required to log in to ScholarOne Manuscripts.

*** PLEASE NOTE: This is a two-step process. After clicking on the link, you will be directed to a webpage to confirm. ***

https://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/astro?URL_MASK=c5a2db8207834bf29f9860bee5b31b89

You will be unable to make your revision on the originally submitted version of the manuscript. You should instead prepare and upload a new revised version. Please highlight the changes to your text in bold or coloured text. Once the revised manuscript is prepared, you can upload it and submit it through your Author Centre.

When submitting your revised manuscript, you will be able to respond to the comments made by the reviewer in the space provided.  You can also use this space to document any other changes you have made to the original manuscript.  In order to expedite the processing of the revised manuscript, please be as specific as possible in your responses.

Inclusion of ADS or DOI/CrossRef links with any referenced article is strongly recommended.

IMPORTANT:  Your original files are available to you when you upload your revised manuscript.  Please delete any redundant files before completing the submission.

Because we are trying to facilitate timely publication of manuscripts submitted to PASA, your revised manuscript should be submitted by 06-Oct-2020.  If it is not possible for you to submit your revision by this date, please let me know.

Once again, thank you for submitting your manuscript to PASA and I look forward to receiving your revision.

Yours sincerely,

Dr. Stas Shabala
Editor-in-Chief, PASA
pasa@cambridge.org
https://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/astro

**********************************

Reviewer(s)' Comments to Author:

Reviewer: 1

Comments to the Author
This paper present a method for inversion of the 2nd-stage (fine) PFB on data recorded with the Murchison Widefield Array's Voltage Capture System, in order to recover high time resolution instead of the VCS' nominal fine (10kHz) frequency resolution. The authors demonstrate the performance on a trio of pulsars with known short-timescale emission structure. I appreciate very much the effort the authors went to to write up this work, and generally feel that more papers of this sort, covering signal analyses suitable suitable to radio observations, are needed in the literature. Unfortunately, as it stands, I don't see the novelty or scientific impact of this work, and cannot recommend it for publication in a peer-reviewed science journal. I strongly encourage the authors to flesh out their derivations, to justify and characterize the implementation more quantitatively, and re-submit. Detailed comments follow.

The paper begins with a concise review of PFBs. An overview of synthesis filters used to reverse their operation is given, and the problem is overall well motived. I applaud the authors for laying out the task so clearly.

The specific choice of synthesis filter, however, seems completely unmotivated and unjustified in any quantitative sense. The authors seem to simply argue "good enough is good enough," but for the central point of the paper I find this woefully insufficient, particularly when well-justified formulations are easily found online and in the community. A quick google reveals https://github.com/jrs65/pfb-inverse as the top result, where a least-squares solution to the inversion is presented. It appears to operate offline, but solves the artefacts described in this work. If the authors require realtime inversion to make it a part of the MWA VCS pipeline, computationally inexpensive solutions exist which vastly reduce the temporal echoes they see. Given that such solutions are in the community already, I would expect at minimum some proof of optimality for some well-chosen metric.

I was glad to see the impulse response to characterize performance, but the comparison to an ifft seems silly except to point out that one should not expect iffts to invert pfbs.

The pulsar observations constitute a nice proof-of-concept, and serve as demonstrations of the chosen filter in the field as the authors do not pursue them to novel results. I do not understand the comparison of incoherently- to coherently-dedispersed profiles, it seems very much apples-to-oranges and not directly relevant to the variable time/freq division of the data. The time-resolved sub-pulse microstructure of B0950+08, however, is an impressive demonstration, well worth including in a revised paper.

Lastly, I would be remiss if I didn't express some concern that the PFB implemented on the FPGAs cannot be exactly reproduced on general-purpose compute hardware! The difference in hardware can hardly matter for a digital operation, and myriad libraries exist to implement arbitrary bit-depth arithmetic in CPUs. It's clear from the properties presented in appendix A that a number of awkward features are already reproduced, and I'd strongly encourage the authors to find an FFT implementation (or implement one themselves) which perfectly mimics that on the FPGA.

I'll close by saying again that I think the literature needs more papers covering topics like this, but they need to be addressed in at least the depth available via my quick google search. Please motivate the design of your synthesis filter, show that it is in some sense the correct filter to choose: optimal for some metric, or with artefacts below the noise floor for plausible observations, or at least theoretically motivated somehow. I would be delighted to have a solid PFB inversion process in the formal literature, and would like to see the authors resubmit after a more careful exploration or justification of the filter choice.
